NZSA Abstract

My knee still hurts; the statistical pathway to the development of a clinical decision aid

Borotkanics R, Rice DA, Kluger M, McNair PJ, , Lewis G, Somogyi A, Barret, D, Walker M. 
Auckland University of Technology, Waitemata District Health Board and University of Adelaide


Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is considered an effective intervention to improve physical function and reduce joint pain in those with end stage knee arthritis, yet up to 34% of patients experience chronic, post-operative pain.  This results in patient dissatisfaction and a leading reason for revision surgery.  The establishment of a predictive tool would therefore have utility in that it could be applied to determine whether a candidate patient would benefit from TKA.  Therefore this study undertook to appraise the accuracy of preoperative predictors of chronic pain at six and 12 months postoperative, based on a cohort of 300 patients.

What is reported herein is the methodological approaches applied to tease out the various nuances of developing such a clinical decision aid.  By way of summary, a series of logistic regression models were developed and refined to identify predictors chronic postoperative pain, where pain was reported using the numerical pain rating scale (NRS).  Self-reported NRS pain was dichotomized based on functional status using a defined statistical approach.  Multivariate models were developed using a stepwise selection approach, accounting for interaction and collinearity.  The effect of changing collinearity thresholds on information criterion is illustrated.  The sensitivity and specificity were calculated, along with receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses for each logistic model.  Final models were chosen by a combination of superior area under the curve (AUC) and Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).  The stability of β coefficients across the top performing models is reported, along with model goodness-of-fit using the Hosmer and Lameshow methodology.  Cut-point analyses are reported on models performances, including the effect of changing pain thresholds on model accuracy.  Finally, the conversion of a superior logistic model into a probabilistic function, of potential utility for clinicians is illustrated.


Keywords: total knee arthroplasty; logistic regression; clinical decision support
